
"The number of UNIX installations has grown to 10, with more expected."
      (The UNIX Programmer's Manual, 2nd Edition, June, 1972)

The UNIX+ operating system started on a cast-off DEC PDP-7 at Bell Laboratories
in 1969. Ken Thompson, with ideas and support from Rudd Canaday, Doug McIlroy,
Joe Ossanna, and Dennis Ritchie, wrote a small general-purpose time-sharing
system comfortable enough to attract enthusiastic users and eventually enough
credibility for the purchase of a larger machine --- a PDP-11/20. One of early
users was Ritchie, who helped move the system to the PDP-11 in 1970. Ritchie
also designed and wrote a compiler for the C programming language. In 1973,
Ritchie and Thompson rewrote the UNIX kernel in C, breaking from the tradition
that system is written in assembly language. With that rewrite, the system
became essentially what it is today.

Around 1974 it was licensed to universities "for educational purposes" and a few
years later became available for commercial use. During this time, UNIX systems
prospered at Bell Labs, finding their way into laboratories, software
development projects, word processing centers, and operations support systems in
telephone companies. Since then, it has spread world-wide, with tens of
thousands of systems installed, from microcomputers to the largest mainframes.

What makes the UNIX system so successful? We can discern several reasons. First
because it is written in C, it is portable --- UNIX systems run on a range of
computers from microprocessors to the largest mainframes; this is a strong
commercial advantage. Second, the source code is available and written in a
high-level language, which makes the system easy to adapt to particular
requirements. Finally, and most important, it is a good operating system,

----------------
+UNIX is a trademark of Bell Laboratories. "UNIX" is not an acronym, but a weak
pun on MULTICS, the operating system that Thompson and Ritchie worked on before
UNIX.
