
Some practical matters. First, the UNIX system has become very popular, and
there are a number of versions in wide use. For example, the 7th Edition comes
from the original source of the UNIX system, the Computing Science Research
Center at Bell Labs. System III and System V are the official Bell
Labs-supported versions. The University of California at Berkeley distributes
systems derived from the 7th Edition, usually known as UCB 4.xBSD. In addition,
there are numerous variants, particularly on small computers, that are derived
from the 7th Edition.

We have tried to cope with this diversity by sticking closely to those aspects
that are likely to be the same everywhere. Although the lessons that we want to
teach are independent of any particular version, for specific details we have
chosen to present things as they were in the 7th Edition, since it forms the
basis of most of the UNIX systems in widespread use. We have also run the
examples on Bell Labs' System V and on Berkeley 4.1BSD; only trivial changes
were required, and only in a few examples. Regardless of the version your
machine runes, the differences you find should be minor.

Second, although there is a lot of material in this book, it is not a reference
manual. We feel it is more important to teach an approach and a style of use
than just details. The UNIX Programmer's Manual is the standard source of
information. You will need it to resolve points that we did not cover, or to
determine how your system differs from ours.

Third, we believe that the best way to learn something is by doing it. This book
should be read at terminal, so that you can experiment, verify or contradict
what we say, explore the limits and the variants. Read a bit, try it out, then
come back and read some more.

We believe that the UNIX system, although certainly not perfect, is a marvelous
computing environment. We hope that reading this book will help you to reach
that conclusion too.

We are grateful to many people for constructive comments and criticisms, and for
their help in improving our code. In particular, Jon Bentley, John Linderman,
Doug McIlroy, and Peter Weinberger read multiple drafts with great care. We are
indebted to Al Aho, Ed Bradford, Bob Flandrena, Dave Hanson, Ron Hardin, Marion
Harris, Gerard Holzmann, Steve Johnson, Nico Lomuto, Bob Martin,Larry Rosler,
Chris Van Wyk, and Jim Weythman for their comments on the first draft. We also
thank Mike Bianchi, Elizabeth Bimmler, Joe Carfagno, Don Carter, Tom De Marco,
Tom Duff, David Gay, Steve Mahaney, Ron Pinter, Dennis Ritchie, Ed Sitar, Ken
Thompson, Mike Tilson, Paul Tukey, and Larry Wehr for valuable suggestions.

	       	       	    	       	     	      	       Brian Kernighan
							       Rob Pike
