
some work too. The rest of this section will discuss the session above, plus
other programs that make it possible to do useful things.

Logging in

You must have a login name and password, which you can get from your system
administrator. The UNIX system is capable of dealing with a wide variety of
terminals, but it is strongly oriented towards devices with lower case; case
distinctions matter! If your terminal produces only upper case (like some video
and portable terminals), life will be so difficult that you should look for
another terminal.

Be sure the switches are set appropriately on your device: upper and lower case,
full duplex, and any other settings that local experts advise, such as the
speed, or baud rate. Establish a connection using whatever magic is needed for
your terminal; this may involve dialing a telephone or merely flipping a
switch. In either case, the system should type

        login:

If it types garbage, you may be at the wrong speed; check the speed setting and
other switches. If that fails, press the BREAK or INTERRUPT key a few times,
slowly. If nothing produces a login message, you will have to get help.

When you get the login: message, type your login name in lower case. Follow it
by pressing RETURN. If a password is required, you will be asked for it, and
printing will be turned off while you type it.

The culmination of your login efforts is a prompt, usually a single character,
indicating that the system is ready to accept commands from you. The prompt is
mostly likely to be a dollar sign $ or a percent sign %, but you can change it
to anything you like; we'll show you how a little later. The prompt is actually
printed by a program called the command interpreter or shell, which is your main
interface to the system.

There may be a message of the day just before the prompt, or a notification that
you have mail. You may also be asked what kind of terminal you are using; your
answer helps the system to use any special properties the terminal might have.

Typing commands

Once you receive the prompt, you can type commands, which are requests that the
system do something. We will use program as a synonym for command. When you see
the prompt (let's assume it's $), type date and press RETURN. the system should
replay with the date and time, then print another prompt, so the whole
transaction will look like this on your terminal:

	$ date
	Mon Sep 26 12:20:57 EDT 1983
	$

Don't forget RETURN, and don't type the $. If you think you're being
