
Mistakes in typing

If you make a typing mistake, and see it before you have pressed RETURN, there
are two ways to recover, erase characters one at a time or kill the whole line
and re-type it.

If you type the line kill character, by default an at-sign @, it causes the
whole line to be discarded, just as if you'd never typed it, and starts you over
on a new line:

        $ ddtae@                    Completely botched; start over
        date                          on a new line
        Mon Sep 26 12:23:39 EDT 1983
        $

The sharp character # erases the last character typed; each # erases one more
character, back to the beginning of the line (but not beyond). So if you type
badly, you can correct as you go:

        $ dd#atte##e                Fix it as you go
        Mon Sep 26 12:23:39 EDT 1983
        $

The particular erase and line kill characters are very system dependent. On many
systems (including the one we use), the erase character has been changed to
backspace, which works nicely on video terminals. You can quickly check which is
the case on your system:

        $ datee<-                              Try <-
        datee<-: not found                     It's not <-
        $ datee#                               Try #
        Mon Sep 26 12:23:39 EDT 1983           It is #
        $

(We printed the backspace character <- as you can see it.) Another common choice
is ctl-u for line kill.

We will use the sharp as the erase character for the rest of this section
because it's visible, but make the mental adjustment if your system is
different. Later on, in "tailoring the environment," we will tell you how to set
the erase and line kill characters to whatever you like, once and for all.

What if you must enter an erase or line kill character as part of the text? If
you precede either # or @ by a backslash \, it loses its special meaning. So to
enter a # or @, type \# or \@. The system may advance the terminal's cursor to
the next line after your @, even if it was preceded by a backslash. Don't worry
--- the at-sign has been recorded.

The backslash, sometimes called the escape character, is used extensively to
indicate that the following character is in some way special. To erase a
backslash, you have to type two erase characters \##. Do you see why?

The characters you type are examined and interpreted by a sequence of programs
before they reach their destination, and exactly how they are interpreted
