
like FORTRAN 77; calculator programs such as bc(1); cu(1) and uucp(1) for
inter-machine communication; graphics packages; statistics programs; and
esoterica such as units(1).

As we've said before, this book does not replace the manual, it supplements
it. In the chapters that follow we will look at pieces and programs of the UNIX
system, starting from the information in the manual but following the threads
that connect the components. Although the program interrelationships are never
made explicit in the manual, they form the fabric of the UNIX programming
environment.


History and bibliographic notes

The original UNIX papr is by D. M. Ritchie and K. L. Thompson: "The UNIX
Time-sharing System," Communications of the ACM, July, 1974, and reprinted in
CACM, January, 1983. (Page 89 of the reprint is in the March 1983 issue.) This
overview of the system for people interested in operating systems is worth
reading by anyone who programs.

The Bell System Technical Journal (BSTJ) special issue on the UNIX system (Juli,
1978) contains many papers describing subsequent developments, and some
retrospective material, including an update of the original CACM paper by
Ritchie and Thompson. A second special issue of the BSTJ, containing new UNIX
papers, is scheduled to be published in 1984.

"The UNIX Programming Environment," by B. W. Kernighan and J. R. Mashey (IEEE
Computer Magazine, April, 1981), attempts to convey the essentially features of
the system for programmers.

The UNIX Programmer's Manual, in whatever version is appropriate for your
system, lists commands, system routines and interfaces, file formats, and
maintenance procedures. You can't live without this for long, although you will
probably only need to read parts of Volume 1 until you start programming. Volume
1 of the 7th Edition is published by Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Volume 2 of the UNIX Programmer's Manual is called "Documents for Use with the
UNIX Time-sharing System" and contains tutorials and reference manuals for major
commands. In particular, it describes document preparation programs and program
development tools at some length. you will want to read most of this eventually.

A UNIX Primer, by Ann and Nico Lomuto (Prentice-Hall, 1983), is a good
introduction for raw beginners, especially non-programmers.

