
permissions granted to your uid and group-id.

The file /etc/passwd is the password file; it contains all the login information
about each user. You can discover your uid and group-id, as does the system, by
looking up your name in /etc/passwd:

        $ grep you /etc/passwd
        you:gkmbCTrJ04COM:604:1:Y.O.A.People:/usr/you:
        $

The fields in the password file are separated by colons and are laid out like
this (as seen in passwd(5)):

    login-id:encrypted-password:uid:group-id:miscellany:login-directory:shell

The file is ordinary text, but the field definitions and separator are a
convention agreed upon by the programs that use the information in the file.

The shell field is often empty, implying that you use the default shell,
/bin/sh. The miscellany field may contain anything; often, it has your name and
address or phone number.

Note that your password appears here in the second field, but only in an
encrypted form. Anybody can read the password file (you just did), so if your
password itself were there, anyone would be able to use it to masquerade as
you. When you give your password to login, it encrypts it and compares the
result against the encrypted password in /etc/passwd. If they agree, it lets you
log in. The mechanism works because the encryption algorithm has the property
that it's easy to go from the clear form to the encrypted form, but very hard to
go backwards. For example, if your password is ka-boom, it might be encrypted as
gkmbCTrJ04COM, but given the latter, there's no easy way to get back to the
original.

The kernel decided that you should be allowed to read /etc/passwd by looking at
the permissions associated with the file. There are three kinds of permissions
for each file: read (i.e., examine its contents), write (i.e., change its
contents), and execute (i.e., run it as a program). Furthermore, different
permissions can apply to different people. As file owner, you have one set of
read, write and execute permissions. Your "group" has a separate set. Everyone
else has a third set.

The -l option of ls prints the permissions information, among other things:

        $ ls -l /etc/passwd
        -rw-r--r-- 1 root     5115 Aug 30 10:40 /etc/passwd
        $ ls -lg /etc/passwd
        -rw-r--r-- 1 adm      5115 Aug 30 10:40 /etc/passwd
        $

These two lines may be collectively interpreted as: /etc/passwd is owned by
login-id root, group adm, is 5115 bytes long, was last modified on August 30 at
10:40 AM, and has one link (one name in the file system; we'll discuss links

