
in the next section). Some versions of ls give both owner and group in one
invocation.

The string -rw-r--r-- is how ls represents the permissions on the file. The
first - indicates that it is an ordinary file. If it were a directory, there
would be a d there. The next three characters encode the file owner's (based on
uid) read, write and execute permissions. rw- means that root (the owner) may
read or write, but not execute the file. An executable file would have an x
instead of a dash.

The next three characters (r--) encode group permissions, in this case that
people in group adm, presumably the system administrators, can read the file but
not write or execute it. The next three (also r--) define the permissions for
everyone else --- the rest of the users on the system. On this machine, then,
only root can change the login information for a user, but anybody may read the
file to discover the information. A plausible alternative would be for group adm
to also have write permission on /etc/passwd.

The file /etc/group encodes group names and group-id's, and defines which users
are in which groups. /etc/passswd identifies only your login group; the newgrp
command changes your group permissions to another group.

Anybody can say

        $ ed /etc/passwd

and edit the password file, but only root can write back the changes. You might
therefore wonder how you can change your password, since that involves editing
the password file. The program to change passwords is called passwd; you will
probably find it in /bin:

	$ ls -l /bin/passwd
	-rwsr-xr-x 1 root     8454 Jan  4  1983 /bin/passwd
	$ 

(Note that /etc/passwd is the text file containing the login information, while
/bin/passwd, in a different directory, is a file containing an executable
program that lets you change the password information.) The permissions here
state that anyone may execute the command, but only root can change the passwd
command. But the s instead of an x in the execute field for the file owner
states that, when the command is run, it is to be given the permissions
corresponding to the file owner, in this case root. Because /bin/passwd is
"set-uid" to root, any user can run the passwd command to edit the password
file.

The set-uid bit is a simple but elegant idea+ that solves a number of security
problems. For example, the author of a game program can make the program set-uid
to the owner, so that it can update a score file that is otherwise

----------------
+ the set-uid bit is patented by Dennis Ritchie
