
Exercise 2-8. cp doesn't copy directories, it just copies files at the first
level a hierarchy. What does it do if one of the argument files is a directory?
Discuss the relative merits of three possibilities: an option to cp to descend
directories, a separate command rcp (recursive copy) to do the job, or just
having cp copy a directory recursively when it finds one. See Chapter 7 for help
on providing this facility. What other program would profit from the ability to
traverse the directory tree?


2.6 The directory hierarchy

In Chapter 1, we looked at the file system hierarchy rather informally, starting
from /usr/you. We're now going to investigate it in a more orderly way, starting
from the top of the tree, the root

The top directory is /.

        $ ls /
        bin
        boot
        dev
        etc
        lib
        tmp
        unix
        usr
        $ 

/unix is the program for the UNIX kernel itself: when the system starts, /unix
is read from disc into memory and started. Actually, the process occurs in two
steps: first the file /boot is read; it then reads in /unix. More information
about this "bootstrap" process may be found in boot(8). The rest of the files in
/, at least here, are directories, each a somewhat self-contained section of the
total file system. In the following brief tour of the hierarchy, play along with
the text: explore a bit in the directories mentioned. The more familiar you are
with the layout of the file system, the more effectively you will be able to use
it. Table 2.1 suggests good places to look, although some of the names are
system dependent.

/bin (binaries) we have seen before: it is the directory where the basic
programs such as who and ed reside.

/dev (devices) we will discuss in the next section.

/etc (et cetera) we have also seen before. It contains various administrative
files such as the password file and some system programs such as /etc/getty,
which initializes a terminal connection for /bin/login. /etc/rc is a file of
shell commands that is executed after the system is bootstrapped. /etc/group
lists the members of each group.

/lib (library) contains primarily parts of the C compiler, such as /lib/cpp, the
C prreprocessor, and /lib/libc.a, the C subroutine library.

/tmp (temporaries) is a repository for short-lived files created during the
