
to read it again. Redirecting news to the file /dev/null causes its output to
thrown away:

        $ news > /dev/null
        $

Data written to /dev/null is discarded without comment, while programs that read
from /dev/null get end-of-file immediately, because reads from /dev/null always
return zero bytes.

One common use of /dev/null is to throw away regular output so that diagnostic
messages are visible. For example, the time command (time(1)) reports the CPU
usage of a program. The information is printed on the standard error, so you can
time commands that generate copious output by sending the standard output to
/dev/null:

        $ ls -l /usr/dict/words
        -r--r--r-- 1 bin    196513 Jan 20  1979 /usr/dict/words
        $ time grep e /usr/dict/words >/dev/null

        real       13.0
        user        9.0
        sys         2.7
        $
        $ time egrep e /usr/dict/words >/dev/null

        real        8.0
        user        3.9
        sys         2.8
        $

The numbers in the output of time are elapsed clock time, CPU time spent in the
program and CPU time spent in the kernel while the program was running. egrep is
a high-powered variant of grep that we will discuss in Chapter 4; it's about
twice as fast as grep when searching through large files. If output from grep
and egrep had not been sent to /dev/null or a real file, we would have had to
wait for hundreds of thousands of characters to appear on the terminal before
finding out the timing information we were after.


Exercise 2-9. Find out about the other files in /dev by reading Section 4 of the
manual. What is the difference between /dev/mt0 and /dev/rmt0? Comment on the
potential advantages of having subdirectories in /dev for discs, tapes, etc.

Exercise 2-10. tapes written on non-UNIX systems often have different block
sizes, such as 800 bytes --- ten 80-character card images --- but the tape
device /dev/mt0 expects 512-byte blocks. Look up the dd command (dd(1)) to see
how to read such a tape.

Exercise 2-11. Why isn't /dev/tty just a link to your login terminal? What would
happen if it were mode rw-w--w-- like your login terminal?

Exercise 2-12. how does write(1) work? Hint: see utmp(5).

Exercise 2-13. how can you tell if a user has been active at the terminal
recently?
